The Project Gutenberg eBook of Histoire du chien de Brisquet / The Story of Brisquet's Dog
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Histoire du chien de Brisquet / The Story of Brisquet's Dog

Author: Charles Nodier

Translator: Michael Wooff

Release date: September 22, 2017 [eBook #55605]

Language: English, French

Credits: Produced by Michael Wooff


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTOIRE DU CHIEN DE BRISQUET / THE STORY OF BRISQUET'S DOG ***




Produced by Michael Wooff








[Transcriber's note:

The French-language etext below is followed by an English translation.

The source edition is at http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k5612458x.
]




Histoire du chien de Brisquet


Charles Nodier (1780-1844)


En notre forêt de Lions, vers le hameau de la
Goupillière, tout près d'un grand puits-fontaine
qui appartient à la chapelle Saint Mathurin, il y
avait un bonhomme, bûcheron de son état, qui s'appelait
Brisquet, ou autrement le fendeur à la bonne hache, et
qui vivait pauvrement du produit de ses fagots, avec
sa femme qui s'appelait Brisquette.

Le bon Dieu leur avait donné deux jolis petits enfants,
un garçon de sept ans qui était brun, et qui s'appelait
Biscotin, et une blondine de six ans qui s'appelait
Biscotine.

Outre cela, ils avaient un chien bâtard à poil frisé,
noir par tout le corps, si ce n'est au museau qu'il avait
couleur de feu; et c'était bien le meilleur chien du pays,
pour son attachement à ses maîtres.

On l'appelait la Bichonne, parce que c'était peut-être une
chienne.

Vous vous souvenez du temps où il vint tant de loups dans
la forêt de Lions.  C'était dans l'année des grandes neiges,
que les pauvres gens eurent si grand-peine à vivre.  Ce fut
une terrible désolation dans le pays.

Brisquet, qui allait toujours à sa besogne, et qui ne craignait
pas les loups à cause de sa bonne hache, dit un matin à Brisquette:
«Femme, je vous prie de ne laisser courir ni Biscotin ni Biscotine,
tant que M. le grand-louvetier ne sera pas venu.  Il y aurait du
danger pour eux.  Ils ont assez de quoi marcher entre la butte et
l'étang, depuis que j'ai planté des piquets le long de l'étang pour
les préserver d'accident.  Je vous prie aussi, Brisquette, de ne 
pas laisser sortir la Bichonne, qui ne demande qu'à trotter.»

Brisquet disait tous les matins la même chose à Brisquette.  Un
soir il n'arrivait pas à l'heure ordinaire.  Brisquette venait sur
le pas de la porte, rentrait, ressortait, et disait en se croisant
les mains:  «Mon Dieu, qu'il est attardé!» 

Et puis elle sortit encore, en criant:  «Eh!  Brisquet!»

Et la Bichonne lui sautait jusqu'aux épaules, comme pour lui dire:
--N'irai-je pas?

«Paix! lui dit Brisquette.--Écoute, Biscotine, va jusque devers la 
butte pour savoir si ton père ne revient pas.--Et toi, Biscotin, 
suis le chemin au long de l'étang, en prenant bien garde s'il n'y
a pas de piquets qui manquent.--Et crie fort:  Brisquet!  Brisquet!
Paix, la Bichonne!»

Les enfants allèrent, allèrent, et quand ils se furent rejoints à
l'endroit où le sentier de l'étang vient couper celui de la butte:

«Mordienne, dit Biscotin, je retrouverai notre pauvre père, ou les
loups m'y mangeront.»

«Pardienne, dit Biscotine, ils m'y mangeront bien aussi.»

Pendant ce temps-là, Brisquet était revenu par le grand chemin de
Puchay, en passant à la Croix aux Anes sur l'abbaye de Mortemer,
parce qu'il avait une hottée de cotrets à fournir chez Jean Paquier.

«As-tu vu nos enfants?» lui dit Brisquette.

«Nos enfants?» dit Brisquet.  «Nos enfants?  Mon Dieu! sont-ils 
sortis?»

«Je les ai envoyés à ta rencontre jusqu'à la butte et à l'étang,
mais tu as pris par un autre chemin.»

Brisquet ne posa pas sa bonne hache.  Il se mit à courir du côté
de la butte.

«Si tu menais la Bichonne?» lui cria Brisquette.

La Bichonne était déjà très loin.

Elle était si loin que Brisquet la perdit bientôt de vue.  Et il
avait beau crier:  «Biscotin!  Biscotine!» on ne lui répondait pas.

Alors il se prit à pleurer, parce qu'il s'imagina que ses enfants
étaient perdus.

Après avoir couru longtemps, longtemps, il lui sembla reconnaître
la voix de la Bichonne.  Il marcha droit dans le fourré, à l'endroit
où il l'avait entendue, et il y entra, sa bonne hache levée.

La Bichonne était arrivée là, au moment où Biscotin et Biscotine
allaient être dévorés par un gros loup.  Elle s'était jetée devant
en aboyant, pour que ses abois avertissent Brisquet.  Brisquet, d'un
coup de sa bonne hache, renversa le loup raide mort, mais il était
trop tard pour la Bichonne.  Elle ne vivait déjà plus.

Brisquet, Biscotin et Biscotine rejoignirent Brisquette.  C'était
une grande joie, et cependant tout le monde pleura.  Il n'y avait
pas un regard qui ne cherchât la Bichonne.

Brisquet enterra la Bichonne au fond de son petit courtil sous une
grosse pierre sur laquelle le maître d'école écrivit en latin:

C'EST ICI QU'EST LA BICHONNE,
LE PAUVRE CHIEN DE BRISQUET.

Et c'est depuis ce temps-là qu'on dit en commun proverbe: Malheureux
comme le chien à Brisquet, qui n'alla qu'une fois au bois, et que le
loup mangea.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


The Story of Brisquet's Dog


Charles Nodier (1780-1844)


In our forest of Lions, going towards the hamlet of La
Goupillière, very close to a great well-spring belonging
to the chapel of Saint Mathurin, there was a man, a wood
cutter by trade, called Brisquet, or the good man with an
axe, who lived frugally from the sale of his firewood with
his wife, who was called Brisquette.

God had given them two fine young children, a boy of seven
who was dark and called Biscotin and a blonde girl of six
who was called Biscotine.

In addition to this they had a mongrel dog with curly hair,
black all over its body with the exception of its nose, which
was fire-red, and it was the best dog in those parts because
of its devotion to its owners.

They called it Bichonne because it might have been a bitch.

Do you remember the time when all those wolves came to the
forest of Lions?  That was the year when it snowed a lot, when
poor people had such a struggle just to stay alive.  The region
was totally desolate.

Brisquet, who always went to work, and who did not fear the
wolves owing to his sharp axe, said one morning to Brisquette:
"Woman, do not let either Biscotin or Biscotine go out until
the Wolffinder General has been.  It's too dangerous for them
out there.  It's enough if they can walk from the mound to the
pond now that I've put up a fence around the pond to stop them
falling in.  I'd also like to ask you, Brisquette, not to let
the dog out.  All she wants to do is go for walks."

Brisquet said the same thing to Brisquette every morning.  One
evening he did not arrive home at his usual time.  Brisquette
came to the threshold, went back in, came back out and said as
she clasped her hands together:  "My God, how late he is!"

And then she went out again shouting:  "Eh!  Brisquet!"

And Bichonne jumped up at her to shoulder height as if to say:
"Shall I go?"

"Down!" said Brisquette.  "Listen, Biscotine, go up to the mound
to see if your father is on his way home.  And you, Biscotin,
follow the path along the pond and take good care if part of the
fence is missing.  And shout out loud:  Brisquet!  Brisquet!  Get
down, Bichonne!"

The children went their separate ways and when they had met up at
the place where the road to the pond crosses that to the mound they
spoke:

"Damn it," said Biscotin, "I'll find our poor father or the wolves
can make a meal of me."

"Damn me too," said Biscotine.  "They can eat me too while they're
at it."

While all this was going on, Brisquet had come home via the main
road to Puchay by way of the Asses' Cross and Mortemer Abbey as he
had a bundle of thinly chopped firewood to deliver to Jean Paquier.

"Have you seen our children?" said Brisquette.

"Our children?" said Brisquet.  "Our children?  My God!  Have they
gone out?"

"I sent them as far as the mound and the pond to meet you, but you
came by a different route."

Brisquet did not put down his sharp axe.  He started to run in the
direction of the mound.

"Why don't you  take Bichonne with you?" Brisquette shouted after him.

But Bichonne was already way ahead of him.

She was so far ahead that Brisquet soon lost sight of her.  And it did
him no good to shout:  "Biscotin!  Biscotine!"  There was no answer.

He started to cry then, for he imagined that his children were a lost
cause.

After running for a long long time, it seemed to him that he could hear
Bichonne barking.  He walked straight towards the thicket, to the place
whee he had heard her and went in with his sharp axe raised.

Bichonne had got there just as Biscotin and Biscotine were about to be
devoured by a large wolf.  She had thrown herself forward barking so that
her barks could alert Brisquet.

Brisquet with a single blow of his sharp axe struck the wolf stone dead,
but it was too late for him to save Bichonne.  She was dead already.

Brisquet, Biscotin and Biscotine joined Brisquette.  There was great
rejoicing, yet they all wept tears.  They all looked to see if Bichonne
was there and she wasn't.

Brisquet buried Bichonne at the bottom of his little garden under a big
stone on which the schoolmaster wrote in Latin:

HERE LIES BICHONNE,
BRISQUET'S POOR DOG.

And from that time on the following proverb came into common usage:
To be wretched like Brisquet's dog that only went once to the wood and
was eaten by the wolf.













*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTOIRE DU CHIEN DE BRISQUET / THE STORY OF BRISQUET'S DOG ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


