mêlées" of the édition définitive, Hugo has an article "sur M.
Dovalle", which contains this quotation. Charles Dovalle, born 1807, killed in a duel 1829, was the author of a volume of poetry, "Le Sylphe", which appeared in 1830, with a preface by Hugo.
of the press were removed, but in 1810 a directorship was established.
The charter of Louis XVIII in 1814 restored full liberty, but restrictions were presently imposed, nevertheless. In 1819 the censorship gave place to a system of sureties. An ordinance of St.
Cloud, in 1830, suspending the liberty of the press was one of the causes of the revolution in that year, and the restrictions were temporarily removed. Since then a limited censorship has generally been maintained, but chiefly in regard to politics and criminal processes.
(1604-1676), was an authoritative literary critic, champion of Aristotle and the three unities, author of a prose tragedy, Zénobie, composed according to these rules and very stupid, and of a "Pratique du Théâtre". He was a bitter opponent of Corneille.
interpreted the Roman law in a more historical and less practical sense than had been usual in France. His name thus stands for legal pedantry. Coutumes means legal usages, unwritten law.
privilege of aristocracy under the ancien régime, and the bonnet rouge was the liberty cap adopted as a head-dress by the Revolutionists.
published under this name in 1604 and 1605. They were taken for the most part, however, from song-books of the previous century, especially a Cancionero general of 1511, and a Cancionero de romances of 1555. But Hugo derived little from the Romancero general except the spirit of chivalry with which his drama is imbued.
fault even with the "Cid" for not being sufficiently classical; Corneille himself called "Don Sanche" une comédie héroïque, and was at great pains to defend it as un poème d'une espèce nouvelle, et qui n'a point d'exemple chez les anciens. "Nicomède" gave him the same misgivings, and Voltaire, the most meticulous of critics, charged it with being trop vulgaire, trop populaire.
France, is one of the most sincere and impressive monuments of Gothic architecture. Its massiveness and originality atone easily for the incongruities of its style.
ACT I.
patroness of Columbus. Her marriage with Ferdinand of Aragon (1469) assured the unity of Spain. They are known in history as Los reyes catolicos.
papal dispensation.
witch.
in everyday speech; but here it is made in order to save a syllable.
Notice the eagerness, tinged with melancholy, with which Hernani goes straight to the subject of his love and appeals to Doña Sol's sympathy, while she pretends to think only of his wet mantle, and answers him evasively. The scene reminds one of the celebrated passage in Goethe's "Egmont", where Egmont visits Clãrchen in his Spanish costume.
to any historical incident. The father of the king was Philip the Handsome, son of the Emperor Maximilian, of the house of Austria. The king's mother was Joanna, "crazy Jane", daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella. Charles ascended the throne of the Castiles (Old and New) in
a horror to myself."
ricohombre.
here a suppressed condition, by the hint of which the mystery of the words is increased. But it will be seen, two lines further on, that where ai-je suits the metre the indicative is employed in a precisely similar case.
on the word bande being used to bring out the etymological force of bandit in the next line.
was meant the kingdoms of Aragon, Castile, Leon, and Navarre.
Pyrenees, in the northeastern corner of Spain.
not the antecedent of il.
Savoir would be more proper than connaître.
only, and of course it does not have here; translate "milady".
doublet."
apostle is patron saint of Spain.
Dieu, sang Dieu, which if expanded, in modern French, would be par la tête de Dieu, par le sang de Dieu.
Ruy Diaz de Vivar, whom the Spaniards called el Campeador, the Warrior, and the Arabs Seid, Lord, from which words came his popular name, el Cid Campeador. He early became the subject of poems, of which the oldest is the Poema del Cid, which dates from the middle of the twelfth century. For the next four hundred years his adventures, real and supposed, form the staple of the heroic romances of Spain.
eighth century, the reputed slayer of Roland at Roncesvalles; he also was a hero of romance.
love the church's sanction."
its falling into the hands of Ferdinand in 1476.
in 1429, by Philip, Duke of Burgundy, the husband of Isabella of Portugal. It numbered originally thirty-one knights, pledged to defend the faith, as the Argonauts had been pledged to seek the golden fleece. Saint Simon tells us that this order and that of the Garter were the only ones compatible with the French order of the Holy Ghost.
The marriage of Philip's grand-daughter to Maximilian of Austria in
defined noun, that is, a noun with an adjective or adjectival phrase.
But dans would increase the line by one syllable, so that this is a proper place for the exercise of poetic license.
dire, but the same reason and the same permissible license have prevailed here as in the preceding line.
the French border.
subject of his grandfather's memory, contrasted with the piety of Don Ruy Gomez.
Aix like ex. In its minster (la chapelle, whence the name) Charlemagne is buried. It was here that the emperors were crowned, up to Ferdinand I, who acceded in 1558.
many of the emperors are buried.
the election took place.
born there, and hence being eligible to the imperial throne, as Ghent was in the Empire.
which, however, he did not, but endeavored to remain neutral.
proper head to the old German body", meaning by tête Maximilian, and by corps the Empire.
was made a vassal of Pope Clement IV. and invested with Sicily and Naples, the Holy See was considered to have some claim on them; but in fact these possessions, called the Two Sicilies, had since 1282 been, in the main, dependencies of the Spanish throne.
represented.
speaking of the late Emperor.
the Pope.
Emperor's death.
denominated "Most Christian" and those of Spain "Most Catholic".
but that is a portion grand enough and worth holding to", meaning that France was enough for Francis.
throne of France, in 1515, crossed the Alps, beaten the Swiss at Marignan (Ital. Melegnano), and conquered the territory of Milan. He did in fact dispute the claims of Charles to the imperial crown, but by no means victoriously, for he was beaten and taken prisoner at the battle of Pavia, in 1525. After the treaty of Madrid and his release he entered into an alliance with Henry the Eighth, of England, and the Italian states against Charles, and recommenced hostilities. This war, however, ending in the peace of Cambrai in 1529, gave Italy definitely into the hands of the Emperor. Francis' unsuccessful wars against Charles continued until the peace of Crépy, in 1544.
meaning that the election of Francis would be contrary to the constitution of the Empire.
gold seal, bulla aurea) was a decree of the Emperor Charles IV, issued at the diet in Metz, in 1336, determining the choice of emperors by a majority of the seven electors, whom it designated. The bulla aurea is still preserved in the "Römer" at Frankfort.
my lord, you are King of Spain!" Don Ruy speaks with suppressed exultation. The old nobility of Spain, and patriotic Spaniards generally, looked with reluctance upon Charles' candidacy for the imperial crown. Robertson, in his "History of the Reign of Charles the Fifth", says: "The Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of their king to the imperial throne with the same satisfaction which he himself felt. To be deprived of the presence of their sovereign, and to be subjected to the government of a viceroy and his council, a species of administration often oppressive and always disagreeable, were the immediate and necessary consequences of this new dignity. To see the blood of their countrymen shed in quarrels wherein the nation had no concern, to behold its treasures wasted in supporting the splendor of a foreign title, were effects of this event almost as unavoidable. From all these considerations they concluded that nothing could have happened more pernicious to the Spanish nation; and the fortitude and public spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of Castile, prohibited Alfonzo the Wise from leaving the kingdom in order to receive the imperial crown, were often mentioned with the highest pride, and pronounced to be extremely worthy of imitation at this juncture."
citizenship in the Empire, Ghent being in Austrian Flanders.
Portugal.
following Victor Hugo was much ridiculed when the tragedy first appeared; and indeed a play upon words which involves such cacophony is a doubtful ornament.
in my love of her my hate of you which fills me."
the order of the Golden Fleece.
ACT II.
head."
he'll be king."
countess."
Highness' antechamber."
means to return Don Sancho's compliment goodnaturedly, but more probably he says this to show him his place.
recovering his senses on the flagstones."
capital is Pamplona. Navarre north of the Pyrenees, or Lower Navarre, has belonged to France since 1589.
of Spain.
Spanish Netherlands, of which, in 1512, the Dutch provinces were incorporated in the Burgundian division of the Empire.
America and the West Indies.
Act 1.
of the insult, the use of the second pers. sing. to persons whom one would ordinarily address as vous being a common way of expressing contempt.
defend the king's civil rights and to prosecute criminals in his name, "attorney-general".
kingdom."
which I have spoiled."
"constables".
"governor of a castle".
ACT III.
save a syllable.
seen"; or, "That (its nobility) will soon be evident"?
this decrepit, bungling love.. should have forgotten."
over of a clause at the end of a line.
similar ones are so closely connected that they may be considered as forming a verbal expression, and indeed are frequently capable of conversion into a verb. Here j'ai nom is equivalent to je m'appelle. Compare trouver moyen, faire honneur, donner conseil.
mere words."
amorous song." Ramage originally meant only "boughs", "foliage", then also chant ramage, "bird-song among the branches".
many in this Act which win for the chivalrous Don Ruy the reader's sympathy and respect.
begins with a consonant.
anticipated by ce in c'est, line 25.
of his remaining years."
imitations of the Latin greetings between monks.
about half-way between Saragossa and Teruel.
directly before the verb on which it depends, so that this expression would normally and in prose be tu pourras le voir pendre. Such expressions as this, however, are common in Molière.
Saragossa, so called because of the legend that St. James, coming into Spain soon after the crucifixion to preach the gospel, fell asleep; whereupon the Virgin Mary appeared on a jasper pillar and desired him to erect a church on that spot. She is said to have come afterwards to mass in the chapel which was built there, and which is now in the centre of the cathedral and contains the pillar. This relic is a favorite object of pilgrimage, as it is believed to cure diseases.
the feet, open in front, worn by priests celebrating mass.
have prayed to her."
Charles VIII of France and marked with his name.— (Matzke). Compare Louis d'or, Napoléon d'or.
these being very common Christian names.
Hernani will attract the king's troops, against whom, by the rules of hospitality, be feels bound to protect his guest.
for such deep, sure, faithful love."
so short a memory! How could he think that all these inglorious men could ever reduce a heart into which his name (Hernani's) has entered, to lesser loves, though nobler in their eyes!"
Valladolid.
Henares is meant, a city between Madrid and Saragossa.
de n'avoir pu, etc. by a double construction.
of New Castile, on the borders of Portugal.
to love", religion being used in the special sense of "sacred obligation", "point of conscience", and aimer being used substantively.
or feminine, in both prose and poetry; but the singular is now only masculine in prose, and of either gender in poetry.
poetical for harnais.
gallows-birdsupon my path."
sins.
to 1535. Galeazzo Maria Sforza, who died in 1476, is probably meant here, as he was a notorious and wicked tyrant; though possibly the author is thinking of Giovanni Galeazzo Sforza, lord of Pesaro, the first husband of Lucretia Borgia.
tyrant in Romagna, and was held two years in captivity in Spain by Ferdinand the Catholic, finally losing his wicked life in 1507.
contemporary Spaniard a monster fit to be classed with Caesar Borgia.
seven heads", alluding to the old Spanish story of the Seven Lords of Lara, a favorite theme with ancient ballad-writers, and upon which two of Lope de Vega's dramas are based: "Los Siete Infantes de Lara" and "El Bastardo Mudarra". The seven sons of the Lord of Lara are said to have been betrayed by their uncle (it is he who is meant in line 16) to the Moors, who slew them. Their heads were served up at a banquet to which their father was invited.
expression in its origin for j'en jure la vérité.
tellement hâte de reluire à ton poing, quand nous, etc.
late to play the young man."
Ferdinand in 1492.
reason, many great Spanish families are fond of claiming descent from the heroes of ancient Rome.
northwest of Spain, famous for its situation, its antiquity, its memories. Columbus died there, in 1506.
Romancero general, to the effect that a hundred virgins were offered to the Moors as ransom for a prisoner.
history of Aragon.
knighthood of St. James (Santiago) and of Calatrava were founded for the purpose of resisting the Moors.
Malaga.
Ronda and Granada.
of Spain. Perry suggests that the author may mean Sueca, south of Valencia.
from Almeria.
affected by us".
apparently) is ignorant of any Zamet in legend or history to whom this could refer.
would you not?" Don Ruy is continuing his own sentence, and alludes to the head of Hernani.
this expression, though it has also been said to be a corruption of "God have mercy!" Translate here: "Many thanks!" ironically.
personae, nor does he have a word to utter in the whole play.
ACT IV.
held court there and at Engilenheim. He was buried there, A.D. 814, in "that basilica which it had been the delight of his later years to erect and adorn with the treasures of ancient art. His tomb under the dome— where now we see an enormous slab, with the words 'Carolo Magno'— was inscribed Magnus atque Orthodoxus Imperator". (Bryce: "Holy Roman Empire".) Mr. Bryce adds: "This basilica was built upon the model of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, and as it was the first church of any size that had been erected in those regions for centuries past, it excited extraordinary interest among the Franks and Gauls. In many of its features it greatly resembles the beautiful church of San Vitale, at Ravenna.. Over the tomb of Charles, below the central dome.. there hangs a huge chandelier, the gift of Frederick Barbarossa."
for a long time in favor of Francis I.
the election of Charles.
must be remembered that French rhymes are made for the eye, sometimes, more than for the ear.
that name, called (in German) Lützelburg.
decapitated before he has done.
that so many of them have been executed, and such large game too, that their deaths have enriched the executioner.
University of Wittenberg, and lent his powerful protection to Luther, though he never publicly declared himself a Protestant. His declining the imperial crown on this occasion, in 1519, has been already mentioned. He died in 1525.
prince of Hesse was one of the electors, as there were none of that house until 1803, when Landgrave William IX of Hesse-Cassel became Elector with the title William I.
alludes here to the story of Hercules and the Cercopes, two mischievous gnomes who annoyed Hercules in his sleep and were captured by him and given to Omphale. Baumeister (Denkmäler des klassischen Alterthums, Vol. 1. p. 664) thinks that these impish creatures may have been monkeys. I can find no statement that Hercules carried them off in his lion's skin, but he is said to have strung them by their feet to a pole.
and the grotesque hero of Hugo's play "Le Roi s'amuse". Translate: "would be a head shorter than Triboulet himself".
the croaking of frogs; and there is no reason apparent why the author should indulge in such a hideous eccentricity.
that I might take them back".
familiarly with tu (l. 17), which was the form of address from the kings of Spain to grandees, whom they also called "cousin", puts on his hat in the king's presence— another privilege of a grandee.
emperor."
Cornelius Agrippa has great insight!" Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, born 1486 at Cologne, died 1535 at Grenoble, was a celebrated scholar, who filled various offices, of more or less doubtful character, under the Emperor Maximilian I. and Francis I. He wrote a satire "De incertitudine et vanitate scientiarum", and a work against witchcraft, "De occulta philosophia", but had the reputation of being a magician himself.
Trittenheim, near Trier, was a Benedictine monk, who became abbot of St. James in Würzburg, where he died in 1516. He wrote a number of semi-historical works, and had a reputation for supernatural wisdom.
divided between Belgium and the Netherlands.
appointment of the monastic chapter which had it in charge.
Hugo's writings. It would be hard to say to what extent the sentiments here expressed were his personally. At any rate, it is a grandiloquent exposition of the imperial idea. As Mr. H.A. Perry remarks, the poet is evidently thinking, and with intense sympathy, of the aspirations of Napoleon I. and his ambition to subject the Pope to himself. It is in this scene that Charles is represented as changing from a headstrong, frivolous, undisciplined libertine into a grave man made noble by a sense of responsibility. It may be questioned whether so sudden a transformation is possible, and certain it is that in the play the Charles of the preceding part is not the same man as he who emerges from the tomb of Charlemagne. It is improbable that the mere heightening of a weak, bad man's ambition would make him good and great in half an hour. But such contrasts are Hugo's delight.
in great institutions.
of the time, it is probable that the people will have a friend either in the Pope or the Emperor, and if one is tyrannical the other may be clement.
thought, in the fulness of time, some day burst forth."
that the will of the people and the will of God will from time to time find personification in an elective Pope or an elective Emperor, and triumph over hereditary sovereigns and time-honored prerogatives.
assembly of cardinals to elect a Pope.
chose this word for the papal mantle, unless helped there-to by the necessity of finding a rhyme for sanctuaire.
much insisted on by Dante in the De Monarchia and the Divine Comedy, that the spiritual Rome of Peter's founding and the temporal Roman Empire of Caesar's creation were divinely sanctioned, and necessary to each other.
Hugo, however unlike anything that Charles would have thought, and it is nobly expressed.
giddiness."
Spanish side. See note 59, act I.
under persecution.
biting (red-hot) pincers."
which victims were set astride for torture.
feet, generally.
this."
defection".
at right angles to the hilt, thus forming across.
Alcala to this high office, and then in the same manner gives Almuñan the Admiralty of Castile, a position of great honor.
title, which was supposed to belong to emperors alone. Charles, however, is said to have caused it to be employed towards himself while yet only King of Spain.
brought from Frankfort to Charles at Barcelona by the Count Palatine.
The Duke of Bavaria was not at that time an elector.
building in Frankfort known as the Römer.
King of the Romans. When an Emperor was so fortunate as to be crowned at Rome he assumed the clamys and sandals of a Roman patrician, and great sanctity was attached to this dignity as perpetuating the line of the ancient city.
brother".
Daniel, v. 5.
Andalusia, assumed sway over all Spain in 709. In the opposition was a certain Count Julian, commander of the Gothic forces in Morocco, who betrayed his master's forces to the Saracens. These, victorious in Africa, crossed into Spain and defeated and killed Roderick in 711.
He has been called the last of the Goths, and is the subject of an ambitious poem by Robert Southey. According to Spanish legend, as embodied in ancient ballads, the treachery of Count Julian was an act of revenge for the dishonoring of his sister by King Roderick.
of Tortosa.
Granada.
decoration.
to disturb his mind, which is full of lofty purposes.
escutcheon on its breast.
Danish parliament was one of the first large political bodies to defy the Pope and set up a national church (1527).
himself for either Charles or Francis, yet maintained such a position that the successful competitor should consider himself his debtor.
Venetians were not different from those of the Pope", and yet that they sided with Francis, because they had more to fear and to hope from him.
knocking loudly at the doors of western Europe, and one of the reasons why Frederick the Wise declined his election was that Charles would prove a stronger power against the Turks.
ACT V.
have him drag his coffin into the wedding?"
doublet, full of wise saws and modern instances."
him."
stairway".
the adjective; in note 1, preface, it was the noun.
hand in this serenade?"
Hernani suppresses almost all evidence of his pain in the presence of Doña Sol.